The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Napoleon Gallery, by Achille Reveil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Napoleon Gallery
       or, Illustrations of the life and times of the emperor of France

Author: Achille Reveil

Release Date: July 11, 2018 [EBook #57483]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NAPOLEON GALLERY ***




Produced by Brian Coe, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)








Some corrections have been made. The names of places mentioned have
been left as spelled in the original. Bounaparte has been corrected to
Buonaparte where it appeared in the text.





                                  THE

                           NAPOLEON GALLERY

                                  OR,

                  Illustrations of the Life and Times

                                OF THE

                           EMPEROR OF FRANCE

        ENGRAVED BY REVEIL, AND OTHER EMINENT ARTISTS, FROM ALL
                THE MOST CELEBRATED PICTURES IN FRANCE

                             PUBLISHED BY

                            ESTES & LAURIAT

                                BOSTON


                          _Copyright, 1888._

                          BY ESTES & LAURIAT.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  I. THE ACTION AT ST. ROCHE’S
  II. ENTERING MILAN
  III. “WHAT A LESSON FOR MAN!”
  IV. THE BATTLE OF RIVOLI
  V. NAPOLEON AT LONATO
  VI. DEFENDING THE REDOUBT OF MONTE LEGINO
  VII. PRELIMINARIES OF THE PEACE OF LEOBEN
  VIII. CROSSING THE BRIDGE AT ARCOLA
  IX. THE CISALPINE REPUBLIC
  X. THE BATTLE OF THE PYRAMIDS
  XI. THE REVOLT OF CAIRO
  XII. THE FIGHT AT BENOUTH
  XIII. THE SPEECH AT THE PYRAMIDS
  XIV. “ALL WHOM I COMMAND ARE MY CHILDREN”
  XV. BUONAPARTE PARDONING THE REBELS AT CAIRO
  XVI. THE PLAGUE OF JAFFA
  XVII. “YOU ARE THE GREATEST OF MEN!”
  XVIII. NAPOLEON INSCRIBING HIS NAME ON MOUNT SINAI
  XIX. NAPOLEON AT MALMAISON
  XX. THE BATTLE OF MARENGO
  XXI. THE BATTLE OF ABOUKIR
  XXII. THE REVIEW BY THE FIRST CONSUL
  XXIII. BUONAPARTE AT MOUNT ST. BERNARD
  XXIV. THE DEATH OF DESAIX
  XXV. THE CORONATION OF NAPOLEON
  XXVI. THE FIRST CORPS CROSSING THE MAINE
  XXVII. THE FOURTH CORPS AT DONAWERTH
  XXVIII. THE EMPEROR’S ARRIVAL AT AUGSBURG
  XXIX. NAPOLEON CROWNED KING OF ITALY
  XXX. NAPOLEON CROSSING THE RHINE AT KEHL
  XXXI. THE FOURTH CORPS ENTERING AUGSBURG
  XXXII. NAPOLEON ADDRESSES THE ARMY
  XXXIII. THE SURRENDER OF ULM
  XXXIV. NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE KEYS OF VIENNA
  XXXV. THE MORNING OF AUSTERLITZ
  XXXVI. PRESENTATION OF AUSTRIAN ENSIGNS TO THE FRENCH SENATE
  XXXVII. THE SEVENTY-SIXTH REGIMENT RECOVERING ITS COLORS
  XXXVIII. THE NIGHT BEFORE THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ
  XXXIX. THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ
  XL. NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE AUSTRIAN EMPEROR
  XLI. STATUES ON THE COLUMN OF THE GRAND ARMY
  XLII. THE DUCHESS OF WEIMAR AND NAPOLEON
  XLIII. NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE DEPUTIES OF THE SENATE
  XLIV. THE SWORD OF FREDERICK THE GREAT
  XLV. THE BATTLE OF JENA
  XLVI. MARSHAL NEY AT ELCHINGEN
  XLVII. NAPOLEON’S CLEMENCY
  XLVIII. THE FIELD OF BATTLE AT EYLAU
  XLIX. THE BATTLE OF FRIEDLAND
  L. THE SIMPLON PASS
  LI. BATTLE OF ESSLING
  LII. NAPOLEON WOUNDED AT RATISBON
  LIII. THE COMBAT AT SOMO SIERRA
  LIV. NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE PRUSSIAN QUEEN
  LV. THE RETREAT FROM MOSCOW
  LVI. THE DEATH OF THE DUKE OF MONTEBELLO
  LVII. NAPOLEON AT THE TOMB OF FREDERICK THE GREAT
  LVIII. THE PEASANT OF THE RHINE
  LIX. THE REDOUBT OF KABRUNN
  LX. “IS IT TRUE THAT THINGS ARE GOING SO BADLY?”
  LXI. THE BATTLE OF MOSCOW
  LXII. THE SKIRMISH
  LXIII. “EVERY ONE TO HIS OWN CALLING”
  LXIV. THE DEATH OF PONIATOWSKI
  LXV. NAPOLEON AT LUTZEN
  LXVI. THE BATTLE OF MONTMIRAIL
  LXVII. NAPOLEON AT MONTEREAU
  LXVIII. NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL AT FONTAINBLEAU
  LXIX. THE BATTLE OF HAINAU
  LXX. NAPOLEON AT ARCIS-SUR-AUBE
  LXXI. FILIAL ANXIETY OF A CONSCRIPT
  LXXII. THE TURNPIKE OF CLICHY
  LXXIII. THE RETURN FROM ELBA
  LXXIV. NAPOLEON AT CHARLEROI
  LXXV. NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO
  LXXVI. NAPOLEON SALUTING WOUNDED FOES
  LXXVII. NAPOLEON IN 1815
  LXXVIII. TAKING THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
  LXXIX. A SOLDIER’S FAREWELL
  LXXX. A SOLDIER AT WATERLOO
  LXXXI. A FIELD HOSPITAL
  LXXXII. ARC DE TRIOMPHE DE L’ETOILE
  LXXXIII. DEATH-BED OF NAPOLEON
  LXXXIV. NAPOLEON AS LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
  LXXXV. THE TRIUMPHAL COLUMN
  LXXXVI. STATUE OF NAPOLEON BY CHAUDET
  LXXXVII. APOTHEOSIS
  LXXXVIII. NAPOLEON, EMPEROR
  LXXXIX. THE DEATH-MASK OF NAPOLEON
  XC. THE FUNERAL PROCESSION AT THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE
  XCI. ESPLANADE OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES
  XCII. THE CATAFALQUE, DÔME DES INVALIDES
  XCIII. THE FUNERAL CAR
  XCIV. OPENING THE CASKET
  XCV. ROYAL COURT OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES




THE ACTION AT ST. ROCHE’S.


On the 4th of October, 1795, at six o’clock in the morning, Napoleon
visited every post, and placed his troops in line. They were few in
number, and might easily have been destroyed by the populace.

While everything portended a sanguinary affair, the danger becoming
every instant more pressing, the Convention discussed the situation
without coming to any decision. Suddenly a column of a few battalions
headed by Lafond, an emigrant, appeared on Point Neuf, and obliged
Cartaux to fall back under the posterns. At about a quarter past four
some rockets were fired from the _Hotel de Noailles_. This was the
signal for the attack. Lafond’s column wheeled round, and marched on the
_Pont Royal_ along the _Quai Voltaire_. This column was routed by the
artillery of the Louvre and _Pont Royal_ after rallying three times
under the fire. St. Roche was taken, and every other post occupied by
the sectionaries, was cleared. At six o’clock, the affray was over; and
if a few cannon were heard during the night, they were discharged to
destroy the barricades which some of the citizens still wished to
maintain.

[Illustration: THE ACTION AT St. ROCHE’S.]




ENTERING MILAN.


On the 15th of May, 1796, Napoleon made his entry into Milan, amidst the
acclamations of the populace; his troops passing under a triumphal arch.
From that day the Italians adopted the tri-colored ensign--green, red
and white.

Napoleon remained only a few days in Milan, where he received d’Este,
natural brother of the Duke of Modena, who came to solicit the
protection of the French army. Buonaparte treated with the Duke of
Modena as he had done with the Duke of Parma.

In taking the command of the army in Italy, Napoleon, notwithstanding
his extreme youth, inspired the soldiers, and even the old officers
themselves, with absolute confidence.

The accompanying engraving is copied from a fresco painted by Andrea
Appiani, who was commissioned to portray in the vice-regal palace at
Milan the pageants of Napoleon. Thirty-five are there painted in oil,
after the manner of Grisaille. This subject has been engraved by the
best artists of Milan; it is rare and much sought after by amateurs.

[Illustration: ENTERING MILAN.]




“WHAT A LESSON FOR MAN!”


In Italy, after the battle of Bassano, Napoleon, followed by his staff
rode over the field. The moon shed her light upon that scene of horror,
and the profound silence of the night was disturbed only by the sad
cries of the wounded, and the dismal groans of the dying. All at once a
dog that had been lying on a dead body, came forward whining, running
back and forth, seemingly divided between the desire of avenging the
death of his master, and the fear of allowing the body to become cold.
Napoleon stopped; his soul was stirred by the faithful friendship of the
animal compared to the neglect with which the other victims were
treated, and he remained absorbed in profound meditation.

“What a lesson for man!” at last he cried.

The incident was so deeply impressed upon his mind that twenty-five
years after, he spoke of it again on the rock of St. Helena.

[Illustration: WHAT A LESSON FOR MAN.]




THE BATTLE OF RIVOLI.


Napoleon arrived at Rivoli about two o’clock in the morning of the 14th
of January, 1797, where he was able to observe the line of the enemy’s
fires who appeared to be encamped in five divisions, with a view of
commencing the attack at different points. Joubert immediately received
orders to act on the offensive; and the Fusileers engaged with one of
the enemy’s columns, and repulsed it by day-break. Another Austrian
column then marched upon the battery at Rivoli; in less than an hour
this was defeated and driven back by Massena, when a third came to its
aid, and would have thrown itself upon the battery, but the French
artillery slaughtered all who came within gun-shot. The cavalry then
charged with daring intrepidity, and the enemy were driven to the edge
of the precipice, and rolled into the ravine below. Whilst this took
place a fourth column arrived at the place to which it had been
directed, on the heights of Pipoto, hoping to turn the French flank; but
it was too late; it came just in time to see the destruction of the
other divisions, and to foresee the fate which awaited itself. Seven
thousand prisoners were taken, with twelve pieces of cannon, and a few
ensigns. In the course of the day Napoleon was frequently surrounded by
the enemy, and had several horses killed under him. In consideration of
services performed on this occasion, Massena had the title of _Duc de
Rivoli_ conferred upon him.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF RIVOLI.]




NAPOLEON AT LONATO.


After Lonato had been taken by the Austrians, and again re-taken by
Napoleon, August, 1796, five thousand Austrians deserted; when, learning
that there were only 1200 French soldiers at Lonato, they marched toward
that place, in the hope of clearing a road to the Nuncio. When near
Lonato they sent to demand the surrender of the city. At that moment
Napoleon arrived from Castiglione, when he ordered the messenger to be
brought before him. “Go, tell your general,” said Napoleon, “that he is
in the midst of the French army. I give him eight minutes to surrender;
after that he has nothing to hope for!” Harassed and fatigued, not
knowing which way to turn, these 5,000 men laid down their arms at his
command.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT LONATO.]




DEFENDING THE REDOUBT OF MONTE LEGINO.


When Napoleon took command of the army of Italy, it was in a state of
absolute destitution.

Napoleon arrived at Nice, reviewed the troops, and said, “Soldiers, you
are badly equipped; you require many necessaries, but our government is
not able to supply them. Your patience and the courage you have shown in
the midst of these sterile rocks, are worthy of admiration; but here you
gain no glory. I will conduct you into the more fertile plains, rich
provinces and great cities shall be in our power, and you will have
riches, honor, and glory!”

This proclamation was received with loud acclamations, and the army
moved onward.

On the 10th of April, 1796, the central division of the enemy’s forces,
commanded by General Argentan, had taken its position before the
redoubts of Monte Legino, which were defended by Colonel Rampon. During
the night the republican troops completely surrounded Argentan. Rampon,
with his regiment, and Laharpe attacked him in front; while Massena and
Augereau attacked him in the rear and in the flanks. The rout was
complete, and the French made their entry into Piedmont.

[Illustration: DEFENDING THE REDOUBT OF MONTE LEGINO.]




THE PRELIMINARIES OF THE PEACE OF LEOBEN.


Some hours after receiving despatches from the Directory, Napoleon wrote
to the Archduke Charles to make overtures of peace to him; the Archduke
immediately answered that he would learn the opinion of his Court,
having no power to treat alone.

At last, on the 7th of April, 1797, the head-quarters were fixed at
Leoben, when Generals Bellegarde and Merfield presented themselves to
demand an armistice of ten days, previous to making a definitive peace.
The armistice was signed the same evening, but the French agreed to five
days only. The Austrian plenipotentiaries arrived at Leoben on the 13th
of April, and the preliminaries were signed on the 18th.

The scene in the picture is in a pavillion of the Bishop’s palace in the
midst of a garden. The French general is saying to the Austrian envoys:
“If we are not agreed upon that point, I continue my march, and behold
the road to victory!”

The picture contains some historical portraits; among others, Lavalette,
aide-de-camp to Napoleon, who wrote under the dictation of his general;
to the left of Lavalette are Louis Buonaparte and Eugene Beauharnais,
leaning his head on the future king of Holland. There are also portraits
of Berthier, Massena, Augereau, and Murat, then inseparable associates
of Napoleon.

[Illustration: PRELIMINARIES OF THE PEACE OF LEOBEN.]




CROSSING THE BRIDGE OF ARCOLA.


The marsh of Arcola is crossed by three causeways,--each of which was
occupied by a French column. Alvinzi, supposing them only a few light
troops, contented himself by ordering two small divisions to disperse
them; these were checked and nearly routed by the strong columns of
infantry to which they unexpectedly found themselves opposed. It was
necessary that Arcola, which was defended by two battalions of Croates
should be taken, in order to gain the bridge of Villeneuve, which was
the only retreat of Alvinzi. The fire continuing unabated, Napoleon,
determined on making a last effort, seized an ensign and planted it on
the bridge with his own hand. He had advanced his column to the centre
of the bridge, when a fresh body of Austrians arrived and commenced a
sharp fire on his flank, which compelled those in the rear to retire.
The grenadiers at the head of the column, finding themselves abandoned
by their comrades, gave way; but not willing to lose their general, bore
him in their arms through the midst of the dead and the dying. In the
confusion he was precipitated into the marsh, where he lay surrounded
by his enemies, and would probably have been taken prisoner had
not the grenadiers, perceiving his danger, raised the cry,
“Forward--forward--save the general!” At this the troops returned to the
charge, and finally drove the Austrians out of the village. Nov. 1796.

[Illustration: CROSSING THE BRIDGE AT ARCOLA.]




THE CISALPINE REPUBLIC.


The independence of the Cisalpine Republic was declared on the 29th of
June, 1797. A general federation of the national guards and of the
authorities of the new Republic was held in the Lazaretto of Milan. On
the 14th of July, thirty thousand of the national guard and deputies
from the departments swore fealty to the new Commonwealth.

The Cisalpine Directory named its own ministers, the administrative
authorities, and governed the Republic as an independent State. The keys
of Milan, and of all the fortified places were duly remitted by the
French to the Cisalpine officers, and the army quitted the States of the
Republic and were cantoned upon the Venetian territory.

Napoleon, after the treaty of Campo Formio, returned to Milan to
complete the organization of this new State, and the administrative
measures of its army. He bade adieu to the Italian people in an address,
wherein he told them, that they were the first who had ever acquired
liberty without a revolution. “_We_ have given liberty to you; know how
to keep it. You are, after France, the most populous and the richest
republic. Prove yourselves worthy of your destiny, by enacting wise and
moderate laws, and by enforcing them with energy.” He told them to be
sure that they had a sufficient sense of the dignity which attaches to a
free people and promised them the protection of the French nation should
they be attacked by neighboring States.

[Illustration: THE CISALPINE REPUBLIC.]




THE BATTLE OF THE PYRAMIDS.


The subject of the accompanying engraving is derived from the account
already given of the Battle of the Pyramids, at the moment when
Napoleon, pointing to those remains of antiquity, and addressing his
soldiers, exclaimed, “_Soldats! du haut de ces pyramides, quarante
siècles vous contemplent_.” The results of this battle are well known,
the name of Buonaparte, now spread panic through the East; and the
Sultan Kebir or King of Fire, as he was called from the deadly effects
of the musketry in this engagement was considered as the destined
scourge of God, whom it was hopeless to resist.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF THE PYRAMIDS.]




THE REVOLT OF CAIRO.


While the French were masters of Cairo, a conspiracy was formed against
them which exploded on the 21st of October, 1798. The populace, at the
instigation of the Sheiks, had sworn by Mahomet to exterminate the
French. At the commencement of the insurrection, General Dupuy was
mortally wounded, and several others were killed; when the drums were
heard beating to arms, the Turks repaired to the Grand Mosque, where
they assembled to the number of about 8,000. Here they were ordered to
surrender, but refused, and seemed determined to defend themselves to
the last, when Napoleon commanded bombs to be thrown from the citadel;
this spread dismay and terror amongst the besieged, which was greatly
increased by the French bursting open the doors. In a few moments the
carnage became dreadful. The fanaticism of the revolters prevented their
perceiving the impossibility of successful resistance to the French, who
had been infuriated by seeing Brigadier-General Sulkowski slain by the
multitude. Girodet has produced a very animated picture of the scene.
The most remarkable group is that where a man completely naked supports
a young Turk, richly dressed, who is about to receive his death-wound.
Near him is a negro, also naked, aiming to ward off the fatal blow, and
holding the head of a young Frenchman. On the left is an Hussar of
extraordinary stature, whose weapon seems to threaten death to the
unfortunate Turk.

[Illustration: THE REVOLT OF CAIRO.]




THE FIGHT AT BENOUTH.


General Belliard learned that 2000 Mekkains and more than 1000 Arabs,
conducted by Hassan, had attacked the flotilla at Benouth, and captured
it, notwithstanding an active resistance. Although he had with him only
600 men of the 21st light dragoons, he crossed the Nile, and sought the
enemy now strengthened by the arrival of 400 Mamelukes. The fight was
long and obstinate. The enemy lost their cannon, and fled in alarm; part
to the boats, where the French soldiery, in their fury, soon reached
them; more to Benouth, and into the castle, which they had previously
fortified. There they defended themselves fiercely, and repulsed several
attacks. The order was then given to burn the village and the castle;
and its occupants were soon surrounded with flames, which they were
unable to extinguish, and which closed up every means of egress; their
only chance of escape was to cut their way through the French soldiers,
which they attempted as a forlorn hope, when they were repulsed by a
body of riflemen, whilst a column rushing upon a breach made in the
wall, kept them within the castle, where they all perished.--_March,
1799._

The original of this painting, by M. Langlois, is in the Orleans
Gallery, at the Palais Royal.

[Illustration: THE FIGHT AT BENOUTH.]




THE SPEECH AT THE PYRAMIDS.


On the 21st of July the army came within sight of the Pyramids, which,
but for their regularity of outline might have been taken for a distant
ridge of rocky mountains. While every eye was fixed on these hoary
monuments of the past, the troops gained the brow of a gentle eminence,
and saw at length spread out before them the vast armies of the Beys,
its right, posted on an intrenched camp by the Nile, its centre and left
composed of that brilliant cavalry with which they were by this time
acquainted. Napoleon, riding forward to reconnoitre, perceived, what
escaped the observation of all his staff, that the guns of the
entrenched camp were not provided with carriages; and instantly decided
on his plan of attack. He prepared to throw his force on the left, where
the guns could not be made available. “Soldiers,” said Napoleon, “from
the summit of yonder pyramid, forty ages behold you;” and the battle
began.

[Illustration: THE SPEECH AT THE PYRAMIDS.]




“ALL WHOM I COMMAND ARE MY CHILDREN.”


We may easily form an idea of the condition of the Egyptians, subject to
the oppression of the Mamelukes on the one hand, and the rapacity of the
Arabs on the other, when the French entered their territory under
Napoleon, announcing themselves as avengers and liberators, as we find
by the following occurrence, which has furnished the subject of M.
Delorme’s composition.

One day when Buonaparte was surrounded by the grand Sheiks, some one
told him that the Arabs of the tribe of Osnadis had entered with an
armed band into a village, driven off the herds, and killed an
unfortunate fellah, who endeavored to make some resistance. Full of
indignation, he ordered 200 dromedaries and 300 horsemen to take the
field in pursuit of the guilty party. The Sheiks, surprised at the
animated tone in which this command was given, looked at each other, for
to them the life of a poor fellah was of no consequence. One of them
observed to him that he had better not embroil himself with the Arabs, a
people always dangerous, who could retaliate more than the evil he could
inflict on them. “Wherefore,” added the Sheik Elmodi, “all this stir?
Because they have killed a fellah! Was he then thy cousin?” “More than
that!” cried Napoleon with energy, “all whom I command are my children!”
And his gesture, more weighty than his words, sufficiently indicated
that he took under his protection the unfortunate who came to plead for
vengeance. “_Taib!_” cried the astonished Sheik, “thou speakest like a
prophet.”--1798.

[Illustration: “ALL WHOM I COMMAND ARE MY CHILDREN.”]




BUONAPARTE PARDONING THE REBELS AT CAIRO.


Buonaparte had great difficulty in subduing the revolts at Cairo, and
his work was only effected by an immense sacrifice of human life. He
succeeded in forcing the rebels to take refuge in the mosque of Eleazar
in the Isle of Ronda, whose approaches they secured with strong
barricades. Here Napoleon summoned them to surrender; and by his order
the divan, the principal sheiks and doctors of the law presented
themselves at the barricades, to induce them if possible to comply with
his summons. They were received by a fusilade, when, at a given signal,
General Dommartin opened a battery upon the mosque. This battery was
kept in constant and fearful play, and produced such consternation and
terror among the rebels, that they cried loudly for permission to
capitulate: “You refused mercy when I offered it,” replied the General,
“the hour of vengeance has arrived; you commenced this tumult, it is for
me to finish it.”

Reduced to despair, they attempted a sortie, but were met by the French
grenadiers. At length they threw down their arms and surrendered at
discretion; imploring mercy, and uttering their cry of distress,
_Amman!_

[Illustration: BUONAPARTE PARDONING THE REBELS AT CAIRO.]




THE PLAGUE OF JAFFA.


On the 6th of May, 1799, Buonaparte summoned the commandant of the
garrison of Jaffa to surrender, who replied to the demand by very
unceremoniously decapitating the messenger who carried the summons. The
French commenced the attack on the city, and soon became masters of it;
they put the garrison to the sword, and abandoned the city to pillage by
the soldiers. This horrible scene lasted for six and thirty hours; and
to the disgrace of the French be it said, they massacred their prisoners
without mercy.

“This conduct on the part of the French,” says one of their own
historians, “conquerors so generous in Egypt, no motive to vengeance
could justify, but it became no less calamitous to them than it was to
their victims. The plague, that terrible scourge of the East, began its
ravages among the French soldiery the very day after the taking of
Jaffa.”

The frightful cry, “It is the plague!” spread itself amongst the
soldiers, and struck terror into the hearts of the most courageous.

On his return to Jaffa, on the 24th of May, Buonaparte repaired to the
hospital, where there were many of the soldiers, some of them wounded,
some afflicted with ophthalmia, uttering most pitiable cries. The
painter has attempted to convey an idea of this scene, and represents
Buonaparte as touching a patient under the blight of the plague.

[Illustration: THE PLAGUE OF JAFFA.]




“YOU ARE THE GREATEST OF MEN.”


Buonaparte reached Alexandria on the evening of the 24th of July, 1799,
where he found his army already posted in the neighborhood of Aboukir,
and prepared to attack the Turks on the morrow.

Surveying their entrenched camp from the heights above with Murat, he
said, “Go how it may, the battle of tomorrow will decide the fate of the
world.” “Of this army, at least,” answered Murat; “but the Turks have no
cavalry, and, if ever infantry were charged by horse, they shall be so
by mine.”

On the 25th the attack was commenced by the French, and resisted for
some time by the Turks with success. Murat, at length, was able to
charge their main body in flank, when the troops became panic-stricken,
and the battle was changed into a massacre; and numerous Turks, to
escape the swords of the French, precipitated themselves into the sea,
where they were nearly all drowned. This eventful day crowned the labors
of Buonaparte in Egypt with glory and honor; and after the victory,
Kleber, in a transport of admiration, pressed Napoleon in his arms,
saying, “General! you are the greatest of men!”

[Illustration: “YOU ARE THE GREATEST OF MEN”.]




NAPOLEON INSCRIBING HIS NAME AT MOUNT SINAI.


Napoleon, having crossed the Red Sea, at the ford, was met on the
opposite shore, by a deputation of Cenobites from Mount Sinai. These
monks threw themselves at his feet, imploring his protection; and after
having invoked the blessings of heaven on his head, they presented for
his signature the ancient register of their privileges. Napoleon smiled
at their request; he took the pen, and no doubt flattered by an homage
so extraordinary, signed his name already immortal beside those of Ali,
of Saladin, and of Ibrahim.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON INSCRIBING HIS NAME ON MOUNT SINAI.]




NAPOLEON AT MALMAISON.


Toward the close of the year 1799, Napoleon occupied the palace of the
Luxembourg. Several courtiers thought that a palace in the country
should also be allotted to his use. He had lived at Malmaison, but this
was considered unsuitable for the abode of the chief of a great republic
and it was decided that St. Cloud should be offered him. This he chose
to decline.

In August, 1802, Napoleon was made consul for life. The court then
became such as it had been at Versailles under the Bourbons. A French
writer says, that when at the Tuileries, “he found it a tiresome abode;
there he had no freedom--no liberty. His happiest days were spent at
Malmaison. Great in himself, he appeared still greater in that charming
retreat.”

Having formerly refused St. Cloud at the hands of the people, he now
took it on his own authority. There he had less leisure than at
Malmaison, as etiquette was augmented in proportion to the grandeur of
his establishment.

Josephine suffered more from this new state of things than any other
individual. She was much attached to Malmaison; it was there she had
spent many happy hours with her dearest friends. She was often heard to
say, “How all this excitement fatigues and wearies me! I have not a
moment to myself! I ought to have been the wife of an humble
cottager.”

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT MALMAISON.]




THE BATTLE OF MARENGO.


On the 11th of June, 1800, and in the evening after the battle of
Montebello, General Desaix arrived at headquarters. The two generals
conversed with each other nearly the whole night. Desaix had much to
tell of Egypt, since Napoleon had quitted it; and he now burned to
distinguish himself in the Italian campaign. Napoleon immediately gave
him the command of a division.

Early in the morning on the 14th of June, the Austrians commenced a
furious attack on the village of Marengo. The First Consul found it
necessary to call in Desaix, who was now half a day’s journey distant
from headquarters, where he had been sent to watch the road to Genoa.
Napoleon arrived on the field at ten o’clock, when the enemy was in
possession of Marengo, and the division under Victor was completely
routed. He sent his guard to Victor’s aid, and assisted himself in the
support of Lannes, directing the division of Carra-Saint-Cyr upon the
extreme right, in order to take in flank the whole left wing of the
enemy.

At the moment when the Austrian horse were about to rush on Lannes’
retreating corps, the reserve under Desaix appeared on the outskirts of
the field. Desaix himself riding up to the First Consul with “I think
this is a battle lost.” “I think it is a battle won,” answered Napoleon,
“do you push on, and I will speedily rally the line behind you.” And in
effect the timely arrival of this reserve turned the fortune of the
day.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF MARENGO.]




THE BATTLE OF ABOUKIR.


The Turkish outposts were assaulted early on the morning of the 24th of
July, 1799, and driven in with great slaughter; but the French, as they
advanced, came within range of the batteries and of the ships that lay
close by the shore, and were checked. This might have ended in a rout,
but for the undisciplined eagerness with which the Turks engaged in the
task of despoiling those that fell before them--thus giving Murat the
opportunity of charging their main body in flank with his cavalry, at
the moment when the infantry, rallying under the eye of Napoleon, forced
their way into the intrenchments. From that moment, the battle was a
massacre. The Turks, attacked on all sides, were panic-stricken; and the
sea was covered with the turbans of men who flung themselves headlong
into the waves, rather than await the fury of _Le Beau Sabreur_, or the
steady rolling fire of the _Sultan Kebir_. Six thousand surrendered at
discretion; twelve thousand perished on the field, or in the sea.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF ABOUKIR.]




THE REVIEW BY THE FIRST CONSUL.


On the 17th Brumaire (November 9th, 1799), Napoleon intimated to the
officers of the army, that he would review their regiments the next
morning at seven o’clock; he at the same time reminded all the generals
who had been with him in Egypt, that he would be glad to see them at an
early hour.

On November 10th, the Council of the Ancients assembled at six o’clock
in the morning; when it was proposed to remove their sitting to St.
Cloud that Napoleon might be invested with the command of the 17th
military division. The motion was passed as a decree, though not without
a strong opposition.

An hour after, Napoleon, surrounded by a great number of generals and
officers, of every grade, attended at the bar of the assembly to return
thanks for the confidence they had shown in him; and then returned to
the Tuileries to review the troops.

As soon as it was reported throughout the capital that Napoleon was at
the Tuileries, and that the chief power was now vested in him. The
people ran thither in crowds. A proclamation was addressed to the
people, and another to the soldiers.

[Illustration: THE REVIEW BY THE FIRST CONSUL.]




NAPOLEON AT MOUNT ST. BERNARD.


The original picture from which this engraving is copied, ornaments the
library at the _Hotel des Invalides_. It was painted at the express
command of Napoleon.

The first consul left Paris for Dijon, on the 6th of May, 1800, where
the reserve army was being organized. At Geneva, he had an interview
with the chief of engineers, for the purpose of ascertaining the
particulars of the intended route; especially directing his inquiries to
the difficult passage across St. Bernard. At the close of the interview,
Napoleon said, “Do you believe, then, that the army will be able to
accomplish this?” “Yes, General,” replied the intrepid engineer, “it is
possible for French soldiers.” “Ah well!” said Napoleon, “let us attempt
it then.” And the orders were immediately given for the army to commence
its march.

On the 15th, at the head of 30,000 of his troops, Napoleon began the
ascent of St. Bernard. From St. Pierre to the summit the trail was so
narrow that the troops were obliged to move in single file. In the
course of a few days he performed what General Suvaroff had not dared to
undertake in the preceding year: and thus the name of Napoleon was
placed on the list with Hannibal and Charlemagne.

[Illustration: BONAPARTE AT MOUNT ST. BERNARD.]




THE DEATH OF DESAIX.


At three o’clock in the afternoon, Napoleon took up his position on the
road to San Juliano. “Soldiers!” he cried, “we have retreated far
enough, now let us advance! You know it is my custom to sleep on the
battle field!” Desaix was ordered to throw himself with his fresh troops
upon the 6000 grenadiers of Colonel Zach. Desaix prepared to carry out
these orders, but was shot dead at the first fire. “Alas! I must not
weep,” said Napoleon; but the loss of this esteemed general redoubled
the fury of the troops. Zach himself was taken prisoner; and the next
day Melas entered into a negotiation, offering to abandon Genoa, and all
the strong places in Piedmont, Lombardy, and the Legations,--provided
Napoleon would allow him to march the shattered remains of his army
unmolested to the rear of Mantua; this offer Napoleon accepted, and thus
became the conqueror of Italy.

[Illustration: THE DEATH OF DESAIX.]




CORONATION OF NAPOLEON.


This imposing ceremony was performed on the 2d of December, 1804, in the
Cathedral of Notre Dame, in the midst of all that was splendid and
illustrious in the Capital of France. With a view to show his power
rather than to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Pope, either temporal
or spiritual, Napoleon summoned Pius VII. to be in attendance on the day
of his inauguration at Paris. In compliance with this, the unresisting
Pope left Rome on the 5th of November, and blessed the Emperor and
Empress, and also consecrated the diadems. Napoleon, however, placed the
crown on his own head, and then on the head of Josephine, who received
it kneeling on a cushion at the foot of the altar steps. We are told
that “throughout the ceremonial his aspect was thoughtful; it was on a
stern and gloomy brow that with his own hands he planted the symbol of
successful ambition and uneasy power, and the shouts of the deputies
present, sounded faint and hollow amidst the silence of the people.”

[Illustration: THE CORONATION OF NAPOLEON.]




THE FIRST CORPS CROSSES THE MAINE.


Admiral Villeneuve in engaging in the disastrous battle of Trafalgar,
spoiled the great plan of descending upon England.

The illustrious Pitt took means to avert the storm which menaced the
British Isles. A treaty of alliance was signed by Russia and Austria,
and the third coalition against France was formed. Napoleon gave orders
for breaking up the camp at Boulogne; and, whilst a portion of the army
commenced their march toward Strasburg, Marshal Bernadotte issued orders
to occupy the fortresses of Hameln and Nienburgh, with the 19th regiment
of the line. General Marunno was at the same time ordered to break up
his camp at Zeist, to quit Holland and ascend the Rhine, arriving upon
the Maine with the First corps of the army, to take part in any
subsequent operations.--_September 17, 1805._

[Illustration: THE FIRST CORPS CROSSING THE MAINE.]




THE FOURTH CORPS AT DONAWERTH.


Napoleon had crossed the Rhine with his army.

The left wing, composed of the corps under Marshal Bernadotte, and of
that under General Marmont, with the Bavarian army, set out on the 1st
and 2d of October for Weissenburg.

Marshal Davoust, leaving Neckarels, followed the road to Meikumlh,
Ingelfrugen, Chreilsheim, Drinkelspuhl, Frembdingen, Œttingen, and
Haarburg.

Marshal Soult advanced upon the Danube.

Ney, leaving Stuttgart, followed the road to Nattheim.

Marshal Lannes quitted Ludwisburg, and directed his march towards
Nordeingen.

On the 6th of October the army held the following positions:--

Bernadotte at Weissenburg.

Davoust at Altingen upon the Wernitz.

Soult, master of the bridge of Munster, at the gates of Donawerth.

Ney at Kossingen.

Lannes at Neresheim.

And the cavalry, under Murat, along the Danube.

The second division of that portion of the army under Marshal Soult,
commanded by General Vandamme, having arrived at Donawerth on the
evening of the 6th, had the honor of beginning the attack on the
Austrian Army.

[Illustration: THE 4th CORPS AT DONAWERTH.]




THE EMPEROR’S ARRIVAL AT AUGSBURG.


Napoleon exhibited to his officers and soldiers an example of
indefatigable activity. On horseback, night and day, he was continually
in the midst of his troops, and chiefly where he thought his presence
most necessary to excite the energy of his soldiers. He did not forget
that similar conduct had mainly contributed to his success in Italy; and
he was wise enough to see the importance of inducing those under his
command, by constantly observing their actions, to expect that he would
appreciate their services, and reward them with liberality.

Ney had received orders to bear down upon Ulm. Murat advanced upon
Burgau, and sought to cut off the retreat of the enemy.

The French army, since crossing the Danube, had succeeded in cutting off
the communication between some parts of the enemy’s army; and Napoleon,
arriving at Augsburg on the evening of the 10th of October, 1805, made
preparations to destroy the remainder.

Napoleon met the troops under General Marmont, at the bridge of Lech, on
the day just named. Here he had the regiment formed into a circle, and
harangued them in the manner of the Roman emperors.

M. Gautherot has endeavored to portray this scene, of which another
engraving and description will be found in another part of this work.

[Illustration: THE EMPEROR’S ARRIVAL AT AUGSBURG.]




NAPOLEON CROWNED KING OF ITALY.


Amid the great events which were then being enacted, one--not the least
in importance--awaited the Emperor of France in the capital of the
Cisalpine Republic, now become the kingdom of Italy. The Italians
decided to offer the crown to the conqueror of Arcola and Marengo, and
in pursuance of that decision they dispatched a deputation to Paris.
Accepting that offer, Napoleon and the Empress Josephine repaired to
Milan, where they were crowned on the 26th of May, 1805, with unusual
splendor. On this occasion, as at Paris, Napoleon himself placed the
crown upon his own head; and, when taking it from the altar, he
exclaimed aloud, “_God gives it to me; beware who touches it!_” On the
8th of June, Prince Eugene, the adopted son of Napoleon, was proclaimed
Viceroy of Italy; and the French Emperor returned to his army, to make
preparations for the memorable campaign of Austerlitz.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON CROWNED KING OF ITALY.]




NAPOLEON CROSSING THE RHINE AT KEHL.


On September 21st, 1805, the three divisions under Bernadotte, took
their position at Butzbach, in the province of Gros-Herzogth; and on the
30th of the same month, the whole army was united before Wurtzburg.
General Marmont arrived at Mayence with his corps, joining Bernadotte
and the Bavarians.

The different columns of the army arrived successively upon the Rhine
from the 20th to the 26th of September; these corps were commanded by
Marshals Soult, Davoust, Ney, and Lannes; Murat commanding the reserve
of cavalry. They formed a line of which the right was at Strasburg, the
centre at Spire, and the left at Mayence.

The reserve of cavalry, composed of five divisions, crossed the Rhine on
the 25th of September, at Kehl. Lannes and his corps, consisting of the
grenadiers under Oudinot, and of a division under Suchet, crossed the
Rhine at the same place; and Marshal Ney, with his divisions, under
Dupont, Loison, and Malher, and the dragoons of Baragny d’Hilliers,
followed on the 26th.

Soult with the divisions of Vandamme, Legrand, and St. Hilaire, effected
his passage at Spire; and Davoust at Manheim at the head of the
divisions under Friant, Gudin, and Bouvrier.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON CROSSING THE RHINE AT KEHL.]




THE FOURTH CORPS ENTERING AUGSBURG.


General Vandamme, in the action at Donawerth, routed the regiment of
Colloredo, who defended the bridge, killed about 60 men and took 150
prisoners. Marshal Soult hastened to the bridge, and bore down upon
Augsburg with the division under Vandamme and Legrand; while St. Hilaire
marched his troops up the left bank of the Danube, to watch the
movements of the army collected round Ulm, and afterward, followed the
two divisions we have just named.

Murat arrived at Donawerth on the morning of the 7th of October, 1805,
with the dragoons commanded by General Walter, and crossed the river to
bear down rapidly upon the Lech. Colonel Wathier, at the head of 200
dragoons of the Fourth Regiment, crossed that river by swimming, to
occupy the bridge on the road to Rain. A regiment of Austrian
cuirassiers made some efforts at resistance, but were charged so
gallantly by Wathier and his small handful of men that the bridge
remained in the hands of the French.

Napoleon, who accompanied the corps under Lannes, took up his quarters
at Zusmershausen, where he reviewed the cavalry under Murat, as well as
the two divisions under Oudinot and Suchet.

Marshal Soult, after having manœuvred with Legrand’s division on the 7th
and 8th of October, rejoined that of Vandamme, to make for Augsburg by
the right bank of the Lech; whilst St. Hilaire pursued the same course
on the left. Soult met with the _debris_ of the Austrian column, beaten
and dispersed, at Wertingen; from which village he drove them, and
entered Augsburg.

[Illustration: THE 4th CORPS ENTERING AUGSBURG.]




NAPOLEON ADDRESSES THE ARMY.


The second corps of the Grand Army, commanded by General Marmont, was on
a forced march to take its position upon the heights of Illersheim, near
Augsburg. The Emperor was by the bridge of Lech, and each regiment was
ordered to form a circle, and Napoleon addressed them on the situation.
He said a serious engagement was probably at hand, and expressed his
confidence in their bravery. Notwithstanding the bad weather, and the
severe cold, while they listened to his harangue, the soldiers appeared
to forget their fatigue and pant for the combat.

Such was the subject given to Gautherot, when commanded to paint this
picture. Napoleon occupies the middle of the scene; near him is Marshal
Bassieres holding his baton; and at a little distance mounted upon a
horse which is leaping forward, we observe General Marmont,
Deputy-Marshal. In the back-ground stands the city of Augsburg. The
whole of the surrounding country is covered with snow.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON ADDRESSES THE ARMY.]




THE SURRENDER OF ULM.


On the 29th of October, 1805, the Austrians surrendered Ulm to Napoleon.

In execution of the articles of capitulation, the Austrian troops passed
in review before the Emperor, with all the honors of war. This ceremony
began at two o’clock in the afternoon and continued until seven o’clock
in the evening. The number of the prisoners was estimated at
30,000--2000 of them cavalry. Sixty pieces of cannon and forty flags
were delivered into the hands of the conquerors, who were encamped on
the hills above the city.

The Emperor, surrounded by his guard, caused the Austrian generals to be
brought before him; they were, General Mack, Commander-in-Chief; eight
Lieutenant-Generals, and eight Major-Generals. Napoleon treated them
with great respect, and said, “Gentlemen, the Emperor, your master
maintains an unjust war against me. I tell you with candor, I know not
wherefore he fights with me; I know not what he demands of me.” Then
directing their attention to the French troops ranged upon the hills in
battle array, he added: “It is not in this army alone that my strength
consists; were it so indeed, I would still endeavor to force my way with
that alone; but I refer you to the reports which your soldiers, whom I
now send prisoners to France, shall furnish; they will see the spirit
which animates my people, and with what zeal they will rally round my
standard.”

[Illustration: THE SURRENDER OF ULM.]




NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE KEYS OF VIENNA.


On the 10th of November, 1805, Mortier met the rear guard of the
Russians, 25,000 strong, and defeated them after a combat of several
hours, having with him only 5000 French troops.

On the following morning, the citizens of Vienna, whom the Austrian
Emperor had abandoned, opened the gates of that capital to the French
Emperor.

Let us see what was said in one of the bulletins of this magical
campaign:

“The Emperor has not yet received any of the authorities of Vienna,
except a deputation from the different bodies of the city, who, on the
day of his arrival, met him at Sigarts-Kirchen. They were composed of
the Prince of Seuzendorf, the prelate of Seidenstetten, the Count of
Veterani, the Baron de Kees, the Burgomaster of the city, M. de
Wohebben, and General Burgeois.

“His majesty received them with much condescension, and told them that
they might assure the people of Vienna of his protection.

“General Clarke is named Governor-General of Lower Austria; Darn is
appointed Intendant General.”

Girodet has chosen his subject from this fragment of the bulletin. On
the side of the Emperor are the Princes Murat and Neufchatel, Marshal
Bessieres, and other officers of different ranks.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE KEYS OF VIENNA.]




THE MORNING OF AUSTERLITZ.


At one o’clock in the morning of December 2d, 1805, the Emperor mounted
his horse, to take a survey of his position, and to ascertain from the
advance guards what they had observed of the movements of the Russians.
He wished to do so without being recognized, but the soldiery recognized
him immediately, and, lighting great fires of straw all along the line,
received him from post to post with enthusiasm. They reminded him that
this was the anniversary of his coronation and assured him that they
would celebrate the day in a manner worthy of it: ‘only promise us,’
cried an old grenadier, ‘that you will keep yourself out of range.’ “I
will do so,” answered Napoleon. “I shall be with the reserve _until you
need me_.” This pledge, which so completely reveals the mutual
confidence of the leader and his soldiers, he repeated in a proclamation
issued at day break. The sun rose with unusual splendor; and was the
harbinger of one of the most lovely days in autumn. This engagement,
which the soldiers persist in calling the battle of the three emperors,
will be ever memorable in the calendar of the “_great_” nation.

The Emperor surrounded by his staff, gave his last orders at dawn and
each marshal hastened to rejoin his corps.

[Illustration: THE MORNING OF AUSTERLITZ.]




PRESENTATION OF AUSTRIAN ENSIGNS TO THE FRENCH SENATE.


After the battle of Austerlitz, where the Austrian power was so nearly
destroyed, the French conqueror sent a _fasceau_ of ensigns to the
tribunes, to be presented to the Senate which had seconded by its
decrees the organization of the army.

It was in the hall where the sittings were held before the marble
statues of all the great men of ancient days that the tribunes, bearing
the Austrian eagles came in a body to offer them to the first
dignitaries in France. The tribunes entered, clothed in their rich
costumes, which contrasted well with the color of the warlike trophies
they bore.

On the left of the picture, the President is seated to receive the
deputation, surrounded by his secretaries. The Duke of Dantzic appears
by his gesture to direct the proceedings. On the same side we observe
the Chancellor of the Legion of Honor, and two other senators. On the
right some other members of the Senate seem to congratulate one another
on participating in such an honorable event. These are portraits. The
sumptuous vestments and the hats ornamented with plumes, which the
artist has introduced with much ingenuity, contribute to render the
foreground of the picture effective.

[Illustration: PRESENTATION OF AUSTRIAN ENSIGNS TO THE FRENCH SENATE.]




THE 76TH REGIMENT RECOVERING ITS COLORS.


A French regiment, the 76th of the line, had lost its colors in the
Grisons; it knew that Europe had not forgotten its misfortune, which was
not occasioned, however, by want of courage. After the taking of forts
Charnitz and Neustark on the 9th of November, 1805, this regiment
entered Inspruck; an officer of the guard recognized in the arsenal the
long lost colors and announced it to his comrades. The soldiers crowded
forward, when their chief, Marshal Ney, standing in the midst, exhibited
these flags the subject of so many regrets. “I return them to you,” said
he, “confident that you will never lose them again.” On the right of the
engraving, a young soldier, raised upon the arms of his comrades, is
seen tracing these words upon the wall: “_Le 76e retrouve ses drapeaux
dans l’arsenal d’Inspruck, 1805_.”

This picture formed part of the exhibition of 1808, when the committee
deemed it worthy of honorable mention. In painting it, the artist, M.
Meynier, had a great difficulty to overcome, that of so many men clad in
uniforms of the same color; this, however, he has overcome with great
success.

By order of the Bourbons, the head of the General has been changed; they
were not willing that aught of Ney should be seen, to remind his judges
and executioners of the part they acted in his political murder.

[Illustration: THE 76th REGIMENT RECOVERING ITS COLORS.]




THE NIGHT BEFORE THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ.


It is said that Napoleon, after having ascertained the exact position of
his army, on the night previous to the battle of Austerlitz, fell asleep
in the midst of his general officers. This was about midnight, when he
snatched an hour from his important duties to restore the energies of
his wearied frame. Ingratitude and treason were alone able to conquer
the will and the power that were to astonish future ages, and to be
felt, if not acknowledged, to all time.

[Illustration: THE NIGHT BEFORE THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ.]




THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ.


The Russian General-in-chief, Kutusoff, fell into the snare Napoleon had
held for him, and sent a large division of his army to turn the right of
the French. The troops detached for this purpose met with unexpected
resistance from Davoust, and were held in check at Raygern. Napoleon
immediately seized the opportunity; they had left a deep gap in the
line, and into that space Soult forthwith poured a force which entirely
destroyed communication between the Russian centre and left. The Czar
perceived the fatal consequences of this movement, and his guards rushed
forward to beat back Soult. It was on an eminence, called the hill of
Pratzen, that the encounter took place. The Russians began to drive the
French infantry before them. Napoleon ordered Bessieres to hurry with
the Imperial Guard to their rescue. The Russians were in some disorder
and flushed with victory, but they resisted bravely, though they were
finally broken and driven back. The Grand Duke Constantine, who had led
them gallantly only escaped by the fleetness of his horse.

The French centre now advanced, and the charges of its cavalry were
decisive. The Emperors of Russia and Germany beheld from the heights
their right wing, which had hitherto stood well against the impetuosity
of Lannes, forced down into a hollow under the incessant fire of
artillery from above, where some small frozen lakes offered the only
means of escape from the approaching cannonade.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ.]




NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE AUSTRIAN EMPEROR.


The defeat of the allied army at the battle of Austerlitz induced the
Emperor of Austria to seek an interview with Napoleon, in order, if
possible, to conclude a treaty of peace. With this in view he
commissioned Prince Jean de Lichtenstein to ascertain whether this would
be agreeable to the conqueror or not: Napoleon agreed and appointed the
4th of December, 1805, to receive Francis II. at his bivouac.

On that day the haughty Emperor went to the French headquarters and
Napoleon said, “I receive you in the only palace I have known for the
last two months.” To which the humiliated Sovereign replied, “You have
made so good a use of them, that you ought not to complain of your
accommodation.” The two Princes soon concluded an armistice, and the
principal conditions of peace were promptly arranged. Francis demanded
that the Czar should be permitted to pass to his own country in safety.
Napoleon agreed to this, provided the Russians would evacuate Germany
and Poland, both Austrian and Prussian. The Austrian Emperor assured him
that he felt sure such was the intention of the Czar, but desired that
an officer might be sent to learn definitely the sentiments of the
Russian Emperor on that point; and General Savary was dispatched to
ascertain if Alexander would adhere to this armistice.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE AUSTRIAN EMPEROR.]




STATUES ON THE COLUMN OF THE GRAND ARMY.


One of the engravings represents the statue which formerly crowned the
summit of the splendid column in the Place Vendôme, designed by M.
Chaudet in imitation of the ancient classic statues of the Roman
Emperors. It has, however, been displaced by the modern one reproduced
in our plate executed from the design showing Napoleon in his accustomed
dress as General of the French Army.

[Illustration: STATUES ON THE COLUMN OF THE GRAND ARMY.]




THE DUCHESS OF WEIMAR AND NAPOLEON.


After the battle of Jena, Napoleon took up his quarters at Weimar; the
royal family of Prussia having fled on the approach of the conqueror.
The Duchess, however, did not abandon her capital, though her lord and
master was at the head of 25,000 men in the Prussian army. She retired
with her attendants into one wing of the palace, and prepared the best
apartment for the reception of the French Emperor. On his arrival she
placed herself at the head of the principal staircase to receive him;
when on seeing her, he abruptly demanded, “_Qui êtes vous Madame?_” to
which she replied, “_Je suis la Duchesse de Weimar._” “Then I pity you,”
said Napoleon, “for your husband has lost his duchy.” He paid her no
further attention but retired to his apartment.

In the morning, the Duchess was informed that the city had been
pillaged, and was still in confusion. She sent one of her chamberlains
to inquire after the health of the Emperor and demand an audience.
Napoleon was pleased, and expressed a wish that she should breakfast
with him. Scarcely had the Duchess arrived, when, according to his usual
custom, he began to question her respecting her husband, and enquired
why he was foolish enough to make war upon him; to which she replied,
that Napoleon would have despised him if he had acted otherwise. “Why?”
asked Napoleon. “My husband,” said the Duchess, “has been thirty years
in the service of Prussia. He could not quit the King’s service with
honor at the moment when the latter had to contend against an enemy so
powerful as your majesty.”

[Illustration: THE DUCHESS OF WEIMAR AND NAPOLEON.]




NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE DEPUTIES OF THE SENATE.


The almost total annihilation of the Prussian army at the battle of
Jena, opened the gates of Berlin to Napoleon. On the 25th of October,
1806, he was at Potsdam, and visited the royal castle, Sans Souci. The
Prussian Court had abandoned Potsdam and Berlin so precipitately, that
nothing had been removed from the king’s palace. Napoleon made his
solemn entry into Berlin on the 27th.

The war with Prussia was thus ended. Of the 150,000 men who formed the
main body of the Prussian army, seven-eighths had been killed or made
prisoners; and the army of Frederic-William now consisted of only 20,000
men, infantry and cavalry. The king, the queen, and some of the Prussian
generals who had sought refuge in Kœnigsberg, were reduced to so
deplorable a situation that they were obliged to throw themselves on the
generosity of the conqueror, and sue for peace. This was granted.

The French Senate complimented the Emperor on his success; and received
from him the ensigns won from the enemy in that splendid campaign. Three
hundred and forty banners and standards taken at Jena, as well as the
sword, scarf, collar, and ribbon of Frederic the Great, were sent to the
deputies to be placed under their care in the _Hotel des Invalides_.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON RECEIVING THE DEPUTIES OF THE SENATE.]




THE SWORD OF FREDERIC THE GREAT.


Marshal Davoust, and the third division entered Berlin. This honor was
the recompense for the glorious part which these brave troops had taken
in the battle of Jena. A favor so simple, rivalling in that respect the
oak leaf chaplet of the Romans, intoxicated the soldiers who received
it, and they swore to be to the Emperor, what the Tenth Legion was to
Cæsar.

He visited the vault where the remains of Frederic were deposited in a
coffin of cedar-wood, encased in another of brass, without ornament or
pompous inscription. Napoleon forbade the passage of the colors, eagles
and cannon taken from the Prussians, over the place where the ashes of
the illustrious monarch reposed lest it might distress his shade, or
seem an insult to his tomb.

The memorable spoils of which we have spoken in giving an account of
Napoleon’s visit to Frederic’s grave, were received in Paris with wild
delight, and deposited with much pomp in the _Hotel des Invalides_,
under guard of the veterans. Amongst these were yet alive 900 who had
borne arms against Frederic, and they received with gratitude, presents
which in their old age renewed remembrances of the army and its immortal
chief. Like the warriors of Sparta, they were proud of being surpassed
by their children.

[Illustration: THE SWORD OF FREDERICK THE GREAT.]




THE BATTLE OF JENA.


Napoleon arrived at Jena on the 18th of October, 1806, and soon divined
that it was the intention of the Prussians to fight on the morrow.

Giving orders to Davoust and Bernadotte, and not waiting for the guard,
which were thirty hours’ march away, he determined on beginning the
attack himself.

Lannes ranged his corps on a plateau in front of Jena, which the
Prussians had unwisely neglected to occupy. Lefebvre and the Imperial
Guard formed in a square upon the summit, and Napoleon bivouaced in the
midst of his troops.

He offered rewards for every piece of artillery that was dragged on to
the plateau, and reminded his men that the Prussians were fighting for
their lives--and not for honor; and that if hard pressed they were sure
to be entirely routed. Such was the result; 20,000 Prussians were either
killed or taken prisoners, among them twenty generals; 300 guns, and
sixty standards were part also of the spoil.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF JENA.]




MARSHAL NEY AT ELCHINGEN.


At break of day on the 14th of October, 1806, Marshal Ney attacked the
bridge of Elchingen, with Loison’s division. The enemy occupied their
position with 15,000 or 16,000 men and upon them the 69th regiment of
the line began the attack in admirable order and with the greatest _sang
froid_, supported by the 76th regiment of infantry, the 18th of
dragoons, and the 10th of _chasseurs_. These four regiments rivalled
each other in intrepidity and bravery. Repulsed in two successive
charges, they began a third attack with still more fury; and after four
hours of a murderous fusilade the enemy were driven back, abandoning
their position at Elchingen, and were pursued into their entrenchments
in front of Ulm. One Major-general, and 3000 men were made prisoners,
and several pieces of artillery were lost to the French on this
brilliant day; which afterward procured for Ney the title of Duke of
Elchingen.

[Illustration: MARSHAL NEY AT ELCHINGEN.]




NAPOLEON’S CLEMENCY.


Prince Hatzfeld, the Prussian Governor of Berlin, at the time that city
was taken by the French, imprudently sent Prince Hohenloe, by letter,
certain information respecting the movements and condition of the French
army. This letter was intercepted; upon which Napoleon directed the
appointment of a military commission to try the Prince on the charge of
treason and espionage.

Previous to the sitting of the commission, however, the Princess
Hohenloe sought and gained admittance to the Emperor, by the aid of
Duroc. Napoleon appeared touched by her situation; and directed his
_aid-de-camp_ to write to Marshal Davoust, who was at the head of the
commission, to suspend judgment.

The Princess protested the innocence of her husband. Napoleon said with
kindness, “Your husband has placed himself in an awkward situation;
according to our laws he merits death.” Then taking the fatal letter he
requested her to read it. The Princess trembled with fear. Napoleon took
the letter again, and threw it into the fire; saying “Now, Madam, I have
no proof of your husband’s crime--he is pardoned!”

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S CLEMENCY.]




THE FIELD OF BATTLE AT EYLAU.


The battle of Eylau, fought on the 8th of February, 1807, was a scene of
carnage which lasted from morning until night, and the field of battle
presented a most horrible scene. Let any one imagine upon a square
league of ground nine or ten thousand dead bodies, four or five thousand
horses killed, whole lines of Russian knapsacks, broken muskets and
sabres, cannon balls, howitzer shells, and ammunition, twenty-four
pieces of cannon, near which were lying the bodies of their drivers,
killed as they were trying to carry them off!--and all this on a field
covered with snow.

About noon on the 9th, Napoleon rode over the field, stopping
continually to question the wounded, to console and succor as many as
possible. The Russians, instead of the death they expected, found a
generous conqueror, and prostrating themselves before him, held up their
hands in token of their gratitude.

The Emperor, mounted upon a light bay horse, was accompanied by Princes
Murat and Berthier, Marshals Soult, Davoust, Bessieres, and General
Caulaincourt, Mouton, Gardaune, and Le Brun.

The original painting of this subject, by M. Gros, is now in the
Luxembourg.

[Illustration: THE FIELD OF BATTLE AT EYLAU.]




THE BATTLE OF FRIEDLAND.


On the 14th of June, 1807, the Russian General was compelled to accept
battle. “This is a day of good fortune,” said the French Emperor; “it is
the anniversary of the battle of Marengo!” Napoleon reconnoitred the
enemy’s position, and detailed to raze the city of Friedland. Ney
commenced operations under cover of a battery of thirty pieces, placed
in the centre, causing severe loss to the Russians. The imperial Russian
guard lying in ambush in a ravine, intrepidly advanced, and charged the
left wing of Ney’s division, which was for a moment broken; but Dupont’s
division marched to their support and brought most horrible carnage with
them. The field of battle at the conclusion of the day was dreadful to
behold; the Russians lost 18,000 men, while the French loss was only
from 4000 to 5000. Cannon, to the number of 120 pieces, 20,000
prisoners, and an immense number of flags remained in the hands of the
French.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF FRIEDLAND.]




THE SIMPLON PASS.


The early history of the Simplon Pass is involved in much obscurity, and
nothing certain is known even of the origin of its name. It was under
Napoleon’s orders that the present road was constructed.

The new Simplon Road was, in its intention and execution, a military
work. It was determined upon immediately after the battle of Marengo,
whilst the difficulties of the passage of the Great St. Bernard, and the
almost fatal check received at Fort Bard were fresh in the recollection
of Napoleon. It was executed between 1800 and 1807, under the direction
of M. Ceard, the engineer-in-chief of the department of Leman, by whom
the road was begun and completed. It now stands as one of the most
extraordinary and daring achievements of man.

[Illustration: THE SIMPLON PASS.]




BATTLE OF ESSLING.


On the 19th of May, 1809, Napoleon took possession of the villages of
Asperne and Essling, with so little opposition, that it was evident the
Archduke wished the battle, now unavoidable, to take place with the
river between the enemy and Vienna.

On the 21st of May, at day-break, the Archduke Charles appeared on a
hill at some distance from the French, whose army consisted of 20,000
men. The Austrians began by a furious assault on the village of Asperne,
which was taken and re-taken several times. Essling was also attacked
three times; but there the French held their own.

Night interrupted the battle; the Austrians exulting in their partial
success. On the following morning the French recovered the church of
Asperne. The right wing of the Austrians renewed their assaults with
increased energy on that point. Napoleon seeing them in such numbers,
judged that the centre and left had been reduced, in order to strengthen
the right wing, and instantly moved an immense body on the Austrian
centre, so as to shake the Archduke’s line, and for a few minutes
victory seemed secure. From this time the battle continued with varied
success; the Austrians at length succeeded in destroying the bridge
connecting the island of Lobau with the right bank. On this Napoleon
fell back on Lobau; when the Austrians perceiving their retreat
recovered their order and zeal, charged in turn, and finally made
themselves masters of Asperne.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF ESSLING.]




NAPOLEON WOUNDED AT RATISBON.


In five days, Napoleon defeated the elaborate efforts of the Austrians,
with whom were allied, perhaps, the greater part of Germany; and a
defensive war upon their own territory seemed now to be their only
resource.

At the battle of Eckmulh, the French took 1500 prisoners, and sixteen
pieces of cannon; and the Austrian army lost nearly 5000 men, killed or
wounded; while the loss of the French and their allies amounted to only
about 2000 men, killed and wounded.

Napoleon was wounded in the right foot at Ratisbon. He expressed his
surprise that the enemy’s gun had reached him, seated upon a little
hillock beyond the range of their fire. Too impatient to allow
sufficient time for the dressing of the wound, he mounted his horse in
haste, and restored the confidence of the army, which had been somewhat
staggered at this disaster, by riding along the lines.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON WOUNDED AT RATISBON.]




THE COMBAT AT SOMO SIERRA.


On the 29th of November, 1808, the French headquarters were at the
village of Bocequilas. They found the pass of Somo Sierra in the chain
of mountains named _Carpetanos_, and through which the main road to
Castile runs, in the possession of the enemy. The Spaniards could not
have chosen a stronger position--the defile was narrow, and excessively
steep; and the road completely swept by sixteen pieces of artillery. At
day-break on the 1st of December, the French endeavored to turn the
flank of St. Juan. While the infantry were vainly attempting to ascend
the heights in every direction, under a double fire from the artillery
and the Spanish musketry, Napoleon came up, attended by his Polish
lancers. The Emperor stood in the entrance of the pass, and attentively
examined the enemy’s position. While thus occupied, the Spanish fire was
redoubled in intensity--numerous bullets falling around the emperor, or
passing over his head. Sensible of the disadvantages under which the
troops labored, he decided on taking a most bold and daring course: he
ordered his own squadron of Polish lancers to charge right up the pass,
in face of the battery. This brave troop, conducted by Kozietulski,
threw itself into columns of four, the roadway not admitting more at a
time. The Poles speared the gunners, and took possession of the cannon,
and the Spaniards continued their flight in such disorder, that they
were at last fain to quit the road to Madrid, and escape in different
directions, some to Segovia, others to Talaveyra.

[Illustration: THE COMBAT AT SOMO SIERRA.]




NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE PRUSSIAN QUEEN.


Napoleon has been accused of having hastened the death of this beautiful
Princess by his treatment of her at Tilsit. It is said he admitted that
if she had been present at the beginning of the negotiations for peace,
she would have had considerable influence upon the result. Napoleon
observed that she received him in truly tragic style--demanding and
crying for justice.

The Prussians were blind to Buonaparte’s power. They had dared to combat
a hero--to oppose themselves to the destiny of France, and reject the
friendship of Napoleon. The Queen solicited, supplicated, and implored;
but in vain. Magdeburg, above all, was the object she sought for.

The Emperor asked the Queen to dinner. Before they were seated, he took
a very beautiful rose, and presented it to her. The motion of her hand
seemed to express a refusal; but altering her mind she said, “_Oui, mais
au moins avec Magdeburg_.” On this, the cruel Emperor replied, “I should
observe to your Majesty, that it is I who give, and you who receive.”
The dinner passed off in conversation of similar nature.

On the morrow the Queen was much enraged on learning that the treaty
deprived her of Magdeburg. She appears to have parted from the French
Emperor with feelings of hatred.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S INTERVIEW WITH THE PRUSSIAN QUEEN.]




THE RETREAT FROM MOSCOW.


On the 24th of October, 1809, Napoleon, in effecting his retreat from
Moscow, rose early in the morning to reconnoitre. While occupied in this
hazardous duty, a party of Cossacks was observed rapidly approaching,
when Rapp said to the Emperor, at the same time seizing the reins of his
bridle, “It is the Cossacks; you must turn back.” Napoleon refused to
retreat, and placed himself, with his attendants, on the highway side.
The Cossacks, being more intent on plunder than prisoners, passed within
a lance’s length, and failing to notice the prey which was within their
grasp, threw themselves upon some wagons, which were more attractive.
This retreat is well known to have been most disastrous to the French
army. The men sank under the heavy sufferings they were compelled to
endure from cold and privation--their route was marked by dead bodies;
and the army presented a scene of greater misery than can possibly be
conceived.

[Illustration: THE RETREAT FROM MOSCOW.]




THE DEATH OF THE DUKE OF MONTEBELLO.


Lannes was born at Lectour, in 1769, of a poor and obscure family. He
joined the Republican army, and made his first campaign in the Eastern
Pyrenees. “_Il était alors un pigmée, il devint un géant plus tard._”
Napoleon so said of the hero who was attached to him alike in his good
and bad fortune.

A Colonel in 1795, he followed Buonaparte to Italy, where he
distinguished himself in the battles of Millesimo, Lodi, and Arcola. He
was Brigadier-General at Pavia, where he took two of the enemy’s flags.
He was opposed to the Papal troops at Immola and defeated them. He then
accompanied Napoleon into Egypt, where he was made General of a
division. At Aboukir, he exhibited uncommon intrepidity. He returned
with him to France, and took an active part in the occurences of the
18th Brumaire. He again signalized himself at Marengo, and at the battle
of Montebello in 1804; where he was created a Peer with the title of
Duke of Montebello, having already received a Marshal’s baton. From that
time he continued to take an active part in various campaigns, and was
in command at the siege of Saragoza, in 1809.

His last campaign was not the least glorious of his military career. At
the battle of Essling, May 22d, 1809, he was mortally wounded at the
very moment he was showing the troops a wonderful example of firmness
and heroic courage.

[Illustration: THE DEATH OF THE DUKE OF MONTEBELLO.]




NAPOLEON AT THE TOMB OF FREDERICK THE GREAT.


The Court of Berlin had fled from Potsdam so precipitately that all the
treasures which it contained were left for Napoleon and his army, who
took possession on the 26th of October 1809. Buonaparte visited
Frederick’s tomb; where he found his sword, sash, and the badges of
several orders of knighthood. These he took, saying that he preferred
them to all the treasures of the King of Prussia; that he would send
them to the old soldiers who had served in the Hanoverian campaign, and
direct that they should be placed in the _Hotel des Invalides_, as
memorials of the victories achieved by the grand army, and as evidence
of the vengeance it had taken for the disasters of Rosbach.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT THE TOMB OF FREDERICK THE GREAT.]




THE PEASANT OF THE RHINE.


Some time after his alliance with the house of Austria, Napoleon, with
the view perhaps of making the new Empress known and popular accompanied
her on several journeys. One day while walking on the banks of the
Rhine, he took a fancy to dine on one of its islands. They sat down at a
table which overlooked a little farm. Napoleon desired to see the
farmer, and despatched a messenger to summon him. Full of surprise, and
doubt, the poor peasant hesitated to approach the Emperor; he advanced
awkwardly, and his countenance fully expressed the embarrassment he
suffered, and was unable to overcome.

Napoleon questioned him respecting his farm, his family, and his
necessities. The poor fellow could scarce find words to reply. The
Emperor kindly encouraged him, and offered him something to drink, when
the farmer, abashed at so much honor, hardly dared carry the glass to
his lips; he attempted several times, and as often failed. At length he
overcame his fear, and not only did he give all the information that was
required of him, but ventured to point out changes which he would be
glad to see.--1810.

[Illustration: THE PEASANT OF THE RHINE.]




THE REDOUBT OF KABRUNN.


The brave Captain Chambure commanded a select troop called the
_Compagnie Franche_.

On the attack of the redoubt of Kabrunn, Chambure at the head of these
troops threw himself into the redoubt, and cut the Russians to
pieces--not one escaped,--for those who avoided the bayonet fell under
the fire of the battalions of Clamon and Dubowski.

A lieutenant, Connard, showed extraordinary coolness on this occasion; a
ball having shattered his shoulder he continued to fight, throwing
himself into the hottest of the battle. Chambure observing this, said,
“You are wounded, your place is not here; go, and tell the General we
are in the redoubt.” “Captain,” answered the lieutenant, “I still have
my right arm; you have only the left!” And with this he reentered the
battle.

Chambure pursued the enemy as far as Kabrunn. At this place he wrote as
follows to the Prince of Wurtemberg:--

“Prince, your bombs have disturbed my sleep. I have resolved to make a
sortie and spike the mortars which throw them. Experience shall teach
you, Prince, that it is dangerous to rouse the sleeping lion.

                                                    AUG. DE CHAMBURE.

Midnight, Nov. 6, 1813.”

[Illustration: THE REDOUBT OF KABRUNN.]




“IS IT TRUE THAT THINGS ARE GOING SO BADLY?”


In the latter part of the year 1813, Napoleon rode through the _Faubourg
St. Antoine_, accompanied by only two of his aide-de-camps. He was soon
recognized, and surrounded by a crowd so dense as to impede his
progress, and oblige him to stop frequently. The faces of all the people
seemed to express an interrogation; as the great reverse of fortune had
caused general disquietude, at length one of the crowd, bolder than the
rest, questioned the Emperor, “Is it true that things are going so
badly?” To which Napoleon replied, “I regret I cannot say that they go
very well.” “What will be the end of it?” said another. “_Ma foi!_ God
knows!” replied the Emperor coolly. “Will our enemies be able to enter
France?” said a third. “That they may easily do, and even reach Paris,
if none will help me: I cannot prevent them by myself,” said Napoleon.
“We will support you!” was the universal cry. “Then,” said Napoleon, “I
shall still oppose the enemy and maintain our glory.” “What shall we do,
then?” asked several voices. “Enrole yourselves in the army,” answered
the Emperor. “We will do that,” said one, “but we will do it only
conditionally.” “What condition?” he inquired. “We will not pass the
frontier.” “Be it so.” “We wish to be of the guards.” “Well enrole in
the guards.”

[Illustration: “IS IT TRUE THAT THINGS ARE GOING SO BADLY?”]




THE BATTLE OF MOSCOW.


Near the end of August, 1812, Napoleon arrived on an elevated plain,
called Borodino, which the Russians had previously fortified with
redoubts and batteries.

The Emperor passed the night before the battle in giving orders. At
day-break he was on foot, and summoned Caulaincourt to his presence.
Throwing aside the curtains of his tent, he advanced towards his
officers who had already assembled in great numbers. “It is somewhat
cold,” said he, “but behold a splendid sun! It is the sun of
Austerlitz!” Each one answered in the same spirit, by some allusions to
this happy presage.

Previous to this engagement, September 6th, Napoleon issued the
following address:--

“Soldiers!--This is the conflict which you have so much desired. The
victory depends upon you. Victory is necessary to us--it will yield us
plenty--good quarters--and ensure a speedy return to France. Act as you
did at Austerlitz, at Friedland, at Vitepsk, and at Smolensk; and the
most remote posterity shall refer with pride to your conduct on this
occasion. It shall be said of each of you, ‘He was in the great battle
fought on the plains of Moscow!’”

“This battle,” says the French historian, “opened to Napoleon the gates
of Moscow! Alas! that this new victory should have been so fatal to
us!”

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF MOSCOW.]




THE SKIRMISH.


The French army, spread over all the provinces of the Peninsula, was
surrounded by enemies; but could encounter none. The guerillas showed
themselves on every side, but they could not be come at any where.
Invisible foes, Proteus-like,--they ceaselessly dispersed or rallied at
the voice of their chiefs. Well-informed on all points, the enemy’s most
trivial movements were signalled to them, and prompt and faithful
reports reached them through the peasants. Was a weak garrison left in a
small village,--it was next day swept away by a guerilla! Was any
considerable force of troops led against these free-booters,--not a soul
was to be met. At the order of the chiefs the soldiers concealed their
arms, and dispersed, only to unite at a totally different point! Mark
well the Spanish guerilla, the _guerillero_ of the Peninsula, the
_kleft_ of the Greeks, and the bandit of Italy, such as are known to be
men of spirit, and think not that this insurgent is looked on with an
unfavorable eye in his own country; far otherwise, he renders too many
services, and performs his business with too much _conscience_, not to
be occasionally visited with notions of valor and glory. He
assassinates, martyrs, and mutilates; but thinks no offering more
acceptable to one of the old saints he invokes, or to his guardian
patron.

[Illustration: THE SKIRMISH.]




EVERYONE TO HIS OWN CALLING.


One day Napoleon, followed by three or four officers, passed through the
market on his way to the Tuileries. The customary acclamations followed
him. A green-grocer cried out that he ought to make peace: “Good woman,”
answered the Emperor, smiling, “continue selling your cabbages, and
leave me to do that which concerns me,--every man to his own calling.”
At this the crowd laughed and shouted, “_Vive l’Empereur!_”

[Illustration: “EVERY ONE TO HIS OWN CALLING.”]




THE DEATH OF PONIATOWSKI.


In escaping from the field of Leipzig, Poniatowski attempted to cross
the Elster by swimming, but unfortunately was drowned. Vernet has given
us an admirable picture and has conveyed in lines not to be mistaken,
the courage and fearlessness of the General in his daring attempt.

Previous to the battle of Leipzig, which occurred on the 19th of
November, 1813, Poniatowski had received his orders from Napoleon, and
on leaving him observed “we are all ready to die for your majesty.”

[Illustration: THE DEATH OF PONIATOWSKI.]




NAPOLEON AT LUTZEN.


The misfortunes at Moscow had disappointed the French Nation; the 29th
bulletin was published at Paris when Napoleon arrived at the Tuileries;
he alone could save the country, he alone could repair the disasters of
the grand army! France was not indifferent to the voice of her chief;
she knew well how to value his ardent patriotism.

The Emperor opened a new campaign, in which he commanded 250,000 men. He
did not deceive himself as to the crisis which menaced France; he
therefore decided to attempt everything, and, if needful, to make
political sacrifices, if the chances of war were against him.

Napoleon opened the campaign on May 2d, 1813, by gaining the battle of
Lutzen; a surprising victory, and one that acquired for him immortal
honor. The General of Marengo had not lost his genius; and the troops he
commanded understood him well, performing wonders which astonished the
old soldiers of Italy and Egypt. Masses of infantry advanced in
squadrons flanked by heavy artillery, and seeming like movable
fortresses; 81,000 foot and 4000 horse combatting 107,000 Russians or
Prussians, of which more than 20,000 were cavalry. Alexander and the
King of Prussia were there in person; and their old guards, so vain and
so proud, were not able to contend against French conscripts.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT LUTZEN.]




THE BATTLE OF MONTMIRAIL.


On the 11th of February, 1814, Napoleon arrived before Montmirail. At
eleven o’clock the Allies formed themselves in battle array. The French
divisions arrived successively, and Napoleon wished to wait for the
whole, but at three o’clock, as night was approaching, he directed the
Duke of Treviso to boar down on Montmirail. General Friant with four
battalions of the old guard, received orders to attack the Farm of
l’Epine-au-Bois, a position on which depended the success of the day,
and which was defended by the Allies with forty pieces of cannon. To
render this attack more easy, Napoleon ordered General Nansouty to
extend his troops upon the right, to oblige the Allies to thin their
centre. At the same time the Russian and Prussian troops were charged
briskly in the centre by the old guard, commanded by Marshal Ney. The
_tirailleurs_ fled in dismay; and the artillery could no longer be used
with effect; but the fusilade became dreadful. This success, however,
was counterbalanced when the lancers, the old dragoons, and the
grenadiers of the guard arrived in the rear of the infantry, and
breaking their lines, threw them into disorder, and killed or made
prisoners the whole body. The Duke of Treviso seized upon the village of
Fontenelle, that of Marchais was attacked on both sides, and all the
inhabitants were either killed or taken prisoners. In less than a
quarter of an hour the most profound silence succeeded to the
fusilade.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF MONTMIRAIL.]




NAPOLEON AT MONTEREAU.


The Emperor is here seen pointing a cannon. This was not the first
occasion on which he had served a piece of artillery. It has been
asserted by some that he was an admirable marksman, while others have
maintained the contrary. At Montereau all the ardor of youth seemed to
revive within him, and his military genius appeared as vigorous as in
his early engagements.

On the 18th of February, 1814, General Briancks had taken his position
with two divisions of Austrians, and two of Wirtemburgians, upon the
heights before Montereau, covering the bridges of the city. General
Chateau attacked him in vain, and was obliged to retire. The troops
commanded by General Gerard kept up the fighting all the morning.
Napoleon arrived on the field of battle, and immediately attacked the
heights, and the effect of these successive charges was to drive the
enemy with a loss of nine thousand men, in every direction. The French
filed over the bridges which the Allies had not been able to destroy.

This series of unexpected triumphs revived the hopes of Napoleon.
Instead of the doubtful battle which he would willingly have avoided, he
had won four memorable victories: namely--those of Mormant, Valjouan,
Montmirail, and Montereau.

At the close of the last decisive combat, Napoleon observed “My heart is
satisfied. I will return to defend the capital of my Empire.”

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT MONTEREAU.]




NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL AT FONTAINBLEAU.


On the 20th of April, 1814, everything was in readiness for Buonaparte’s
departure from Fontainbleau. He ordered that the guard should be
summoned, and advancing toward them, signified that he would speak to
them.

“Soldiers! my old guard!” said he, “I bid you adieu! For twenty-eight
years I have found you constantly in the way of honor and glory. In
these latter times, as in the days of our prosperity, you have not
ceased to be models of bravery and fidelity. With such men as you our
cause need not be lost, but the war would be interminable; it would be a
civil war and France would be more than ever unhappy! I have then
sacrificed all our interests to those of our country; I leave you; do
you, my friends, continue to serve France. Her happiness has been my
only wish; it will always be the object of my prayers! Regret me not. If
I live, it is only to advance your glory farther. I wish to record with
my pen the great things we have done together! Farewell, my children! I
would gladly embrace you all--I embrace your general!” General Petit
brought forward the Eagle: Napoleon took him in his arms and kissed the
standard. “Farewell, once more, my brave companions--farewell!”

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL AT FONTAINBLEAU.]




THE BATTLE OF HAINAU.


The Austro-Bavarians had taken up their position in the woods near
Hainau before the Emperor approached the Maine. He came up with them on
the morning of the 30th, and his troops charged on the instant with the
fury of despair. Buonaparte cut his way through ere nightfall; and
Marmont, with the rear, had equal success on the 31st. In these actions
there fell 6000 of the French; while the enemy had 10,000 killed or
wounded, and lost 4000 prisoners; and these losses would have been far
greater, but for the ready wit of a patriotic miller, who, watching the
tide of battle, suddenly let the water into a mill-stream, and thus
interposed a seasonable obstacle between the French cavalry and some
German infantry, whom they had been driving before them; a service which
was munificently rewarded by the King of Prussia later.

The pursuit had been entrusted to the Austrians, who urged it with far
less vigor than the Prussians, under the fiery guidance of Blucher,
would probably have exerted. No considerable advantage, therefore,
followed the battle of Hainau. The remains of the French host at length
passed the Rhine; and the Emperor having quitted them at Mentz, arrived
in Paris on the 9th of November.

Thus terminated the campaign in Saxony.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF HAINAU.]




NAPOLEON AT ARCIS-SUR-AUBE.


During the night between the 16th and 17th of February, 1814, Napoleon,
accompanied by a small escort of Polish lancers, reconnoitred the
enemy’s line, when, on leaving Arcis, he was attacked by a corps of
Russian cuirassiers and Cossacks. The Poles, commanded by Skrzinecki,
their captain, rapidly formed in a square about the Emperor; and though
the enemy in their front were supposed to be six times their number,
they succeeded in repulsing them, and rescued Napoleon from his imminent
danger.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT ARCIS-SUR-AUBE.]




FILIAL ANXIETY OF A CONSCRIPT.


During the campaign of 1814, the services of every French soldier were
required for the defence of that empire, then invaded from all quarters.
On one occasion, as Napoleon was passing along the line on horseback, a
soldier stepped out of the ranks, and presented his arms; “Sire,” said
he, in offering a petition to the Emperor’s notice, “my mother is old
and infirm, and is dependent solely on my labors for subsistence.”
Napoleon was forcibly struck with these words, uttered with timidity,
and took the petition and rode on. On arriving at head-quarters, his
first care was to read the petition, which stated that the soldier’s
poor mother was in great necessity; that her only son, who supported her
was called upon to fight for his country; and that he now sought
permission to return and perform his first and most important duty. On
this, Napoleon issued an order to the sub-perfect of the
_arrondissement_ where the old woman resided, to seek her out, and to
tell her that the Emperor would take her under his protection, and give
her 1200 francs with a pension. At the same time the poor fellow’s
colonel was directed to tell him to be at ease on his mother’s account,
as the Emperor would provide for her, but his services could not be
dispensed with, as soldiers were required to oppose the enemies of his
country.

[Illustration: FILIAL ANXIETY OF A CONSCRIPT.]




THE TURNPIKE OF CLICHY.


Previous to Napoleon’s abdication the Allied army had approached and
even entered Paris, and taking possession of the _Faubourg des
Batignolles_, compelling the National Guard to repair to the Barrière de
Clichy, where some slight skirmishing occurred, until it was announced
that an armistice would forthwith be made.

This armistice was the precursor of those treaties in which Napoleon
gave in his unconditional abdication, and retired on a pension, to the
Isle of Elba, whence shortly after he succeeded in making his escape,
and once more, though fortunately for the last time, disturbed the peace
of Europe.

[Illustration: THE TURNPIKE OF CLICHY.]




THE RETURN FROM ELBA.


It was about five o’clock in the afternoon of the 1st of March, 1815,
that Napoleon landed at Cannes, in the Gulf of Juan. From thence he
proceeded toward Paris with his little army, then consisting only of 500
grenadiers, of the guard, 200 dragoons and one hundred Polish lancers;
these last being without horses, were obliged to carry their saddles on
their backs.

When between Mure and Vizele, Cambronne, who commanded the advance guard
of forty grenadiers, met a battalion which had been sent from Grenoble
to arrest their march. Colonel La Badoyere, who headed the battalion,
refused to parley with Cambronne; upon which the Emperor, without
hesitation, advanced alone; followed at some distance by 100 grenadiers
with their arms reversed. There was profound silence until Napoleon had
approached within a few paces, when he halted, and throwing open his
surtout exclaimed, “If there be amongst you a soldier who would kill his
general--his Emperor, let him do it now!--Here I am!” The cry of _Vive
l’Empereur_ burst instantaneously from every lip. Napoleon threw himself
among them, and taking a veteran, covered with chevrons and medals, by
the arm, said, “Speak honestly, old moustache, couldst thou have had the
heart to kill thy Emperor?” The man dropped his ramrod into his piece to
show that it was unloaded, and answered, “Judge if I could have done
thee much harm,--all the rest are the same.”

[Illustration: THE RETURN FROM ELBA.]




NAPOLEON AT CHARLEROI.


Horace Vernet has attempted to present us with a portrait of Napoleon,
as he appeared on the eve of his great conflict with the Allied Army.
Buonaparte arrived at Charleroi about 11 o’clock, on the 15th of June,
1815, which place was evacuated by the Prussians, under General Ziethen,
in great haste. Napoleon ordered Marshal Ney to repair to Gosselin, and
take the command of the whole of the left wing of the army, occupying a
position beyond Quatre-Bras with 40,000 men. The Prussians retired upon
Fleurus.

On the 18th of June the battle of Waterloo took place.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT CHARLEROI.]




NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO.


The battle of Waterloo is an occurence with which all England is so well
acquainted, that it would be superfluous to give an account of it here.
We may, however, mention, that the destruction of the French army on
that important occasion, is considered by French historians to be
entirely the consequence of General Bourmont’s desertion. The project of
Napoleon was to concentrate his forces upon the Allied Army suddenly,
which ought to have been done in the night, when the Duke of Wellington
and the English officers were at the ball at Brussels.

On this sanguinary field the French lost 19,000 men, while the Allied
Army sustained a loss of nearly double the number of the former.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO.]




NAPOLEON SALUTING A PARTY OF WOUNDED SOLDIERS.


“_Honneur au courage malheureux!_” said Napoleon, in passing a party of
wounded enemies. Debret has made an agreeable picture from a rather
disagreeable subject; though it is certainly gratifying to find the
leader of an army rendering due respect to those who, in their
courageous efforts to overcome an opposing force, have unfortunately
received wounds and injuries which, perhaps, disable them for life. The
admirers of Napoleon maintain that the above incident did actually
occur, while others assert that he was by nature cruel and unmerciful.
We take upon ourselves to support neither the one nor the other; amid
the mass of conflicting evidence we cannot see how it is possible to
arrive at a conclusion. That Napoleon was a great man none can deny;
that he was a good man, few will be hardy enough to maintain.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON SALUTING WOUNDED FOES.]




NAPOLEON IN 1815.


Horace Vernet has admirably conveyed in the countenance of Napoleon all
the sentiments which animated the soul of “_le Grande Homme_” in the
last moments of his military glory. Those who saw Napoleon at Waterloo
have not failed to admire this painting, as well as the beautiful copy
of it by M. Marin Levinge. Reveil has reproduced it admirably in the
accompanying engraving.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON IN 1815.]




TAKING THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.


After the distribution of the eagles at the Champ de Mars, Napoleon
administered the following oath to the army:--

“Soldiers! behold your banners! These eagles shall always serve you for
rallying points. They shall be ever where your Emperor shall judge it
necessary for the defence of his throne and of his people. Do you swear
to sacrifice your life in their defence, and constantly to maintain them
by your courage in the way of victory? Do you swear it?”

All the army answered by acclamation: “We swear it! Long live the
Emperor!”

[Illustration: TAKING THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.]




A SOLDIER’S FAREWELL.


The brave corporal has received a mortal wound, and takes his last
farewell of a young comrade.

How many a scene like this has been witnessed on the battle-field. How
many of the strong and the powerful among mankind, have the
murder-working engines of war brought to a premature death.

Belangé’s figures are true to nature; there is nothing startling in
them; nor anything of the conventional mannerism of the studio, which
throws so much coldness into ordinary compositions. “It will be seen,”
says the French critic, “that M. Belangé will take the place of Vernet
and Charlet, if those gentlemen are content to rest on their laurels, or
become indifferent to the art which they have so worthily exercised.”

[Illustration: A SOLDIER’S FAREWELL.]




A SOLDIER AT WATERLOO.


M. Jazet has here attempted to produce a picture which shall revive all
the recollections of that remarkable period, when the extraordinary
career of Napoleon spread terror wherever his name and deeds were heard
of. He has represented an old soldier fatigued and careworn, and has
made nature itself sympathize with his feelings. The sun is setting in
the west, his crimson rays dimmed by intervening clouds, while the scene
around is desolate and barren.

The picture was placed in the gallery of the Palais Royal, and those who
visit it readily enter into its spirit, seeing there depicted the end of
a grand epoch in the history of France.

[Illustration: A SOLDIER AT WATERLOO.]




A FIELD HOSPITAL.


The devotion shown to the memory of Napoleon, by the spirited painter of
the original picture from which this is copied, has been profitable to
that talented artist. Few of his contemporaries have succeeded better
than M. Bellangé, in depicting subjects which illustrate the “Imperial
Epoch.”

This picture is well conceived, free and natural. It is a scene which
occurred repeatedly on the battle-field in Napoleon’s campaigns. “_Vive
l’Empereur_,” let the wound be slight or mortal; “_Vive l’Empereur!_”
was the wounded soldier’s cry, though scarcely able to see his Captain
as he passed. With such devotion as this, what had not the ‘_Grand
Homme_’ to hope for! These were not the soldiers to abandon him. Honor,
rank, riches, were not able to corrupt them. And if they had not been so
patriotic; if they had not been models of military discipline;--what
would they not have undertaken for love of their General, for him who
had led them to victory and glory. Poor fellows! humble laborers in the
vast plain of a great architect, you assisted in raising the great
monument; your task should not have been without recompense.

[Illustration: A FIELD HOSPITAL.]




ARC DE TRIOMPHE DE L’ETOILE.


This monumental arch stands in a circular area without the _barrière_ of
that name, at the end of the avenues in the _Champs Elysées_, and in
front of the Palace of the Tuileries. It is of greater size than
anything of the kind hitherto erected, being 133 feet in height,
including the cornice and attic. The fronts are 134 feet in breadth, and
the sides 67. The principal arch is 92 feet in height, and 44 in
breadth: the transverse arch 56 feet by 55½. The first stone of this
edifice, which was begun by the city of Paris to commemorate Napoleon’s
triumph over Russia, and his alliance with the Emperor Alexander at
Tilsit, was laid on the 15th of August, 1806, under the direction of
Chalgrin. From the beginning of this undertaking, the work was suspended
and renewed at intervals until its completion in 1830.

[Illustration: ARC DE TRIOMPHE DE L’ETOILE.]




DEATH-BED OF NAPOLEON.


From the 15th to the 25th of April, Napoleon occupied himself with
drawing up his last will, in which he bequeathed his orders, and a
specimen of every article in his wardrobe, to his son. On the 18th, he
gave directions for opening his body after death, expressing a special
desire that his stomach should be examined and its appearance
communicated to his son. “The symptoms,” he said, “seem to show that of
all my organs the stomach is the most diseased. I am inclined to believe
it is attacked with the disorder that killed my father--the physicians
of Montpellier prophesied it would be hereditary in our family.”

On the third of May, it became evident that the scene was near its
close. The attendants would fain have called in more medical men; but
they durst not, knowing his feelings on this head: “even had he been
speechless,” said one of them, “we could not have brooked his eye.” The
last sacraments of the church were now administered by Vignali. He
lingered on thenceforth in a stupor. On the 4th, the island was swept by
a tremendous storm, which tore up almost all the trees about Longwood by
the roots. The 5th was another day of tempests; and about six in the
evening, Napoleon having pronounced the words “_tête d’armée_,” passed
forever from the dreams of battle.

[Illustration: DEATH-BED OF NAPOLEON.]




NAPOLEON AS LIEUTENANT COLONEL.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AS LIEUTENANT COLONEL.]




THE TRIUMPHAL COLUMN.


The _Fontaine de la Victoire_, built upon the _Place du Châtelet_, in
front of the _Pont au Change_, was one of the first established in the
French Capital.

It was also one of the first monuments raised to record the glory of the
French arms. The architect Brasle superintended its erection, as well as
that of others of the same nature, placed in different parts of Paris,
as much for utility as for ornament.

The conception of this is simple, and its execution leaves nothing to be
desired. The glorious deeds of the live years were there recorded as so
many talismans. How many times have we feared that the lever, or the
petard, would be applied to its destruction. But the charm of the French
eagle, and of victory distributing her crowns, were safeguards, and
served to awe the vandal conqueror. When the famous names of _Rivoli!_
_Lodi!_ _Arcole!_ _Mont-Thabor!_ _Pyramids!_ _Marengo!_ _Austerlitz!_
_Ulm!_ _Eylau!_ _Friedland!_ and _Dantzic!_ were inscribed upon the
column, who dare lay their sacrilegious hands upon it?

[Illustration: THE TRIUMPHAL COLUMN.]




STATUE OF NAPOLEON, BY CHAUDET.


Napoleon was anxious to place his name on the list of those Emperors of
old, whose names are rendered immortal, not so much by their own heroic
or noble deeds as by the flattering notices of them in the deathless
writings of poets and historians. On the occasion of his statue being
first required for the Column which now stands in the Place Vendome, he
directed that it should be attired as a senator of ancient Rome, and
Chaudet produced the statue, of which the accompanying engraving is a
faithful representation. It has since been replaced by one in military
uniform.

[Illustration: STATUE OF NAPOLEON BY CHAUDET.]




APOTHEOSIS.


The conclusion of Napoleon’s remarkable history is here well conceived.
The mound of earth surmounted by his cap and sword, points out the last
earthly tenement of the ex-Emperor; the group upon that point of the
rock which juts into the sea adds considerably to the interest of the
scene; few have forgotten the faithful companions of Napoleon when
prisoner at St Helena. The artist, Horace Vernet, has called poetry to
his aid and introduced the shades of several of the departed comrades of
Napoleon, who assisted him in gaining that fame which will ever attach
to his character in the future history of European nations. Two aged
minstrels placed on the right of the engraving, are supposed to be
recounting the history of his various exploits.

[Illustration: APOTHEOSIS.]




NAPOLEON, EMPEROR.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON, EMPEROR.]




THE DEATH MASK OF NAPOLEON.

[Illustration: THE DEATH-MASK OF NAPOLEON.]




THE FUNERAL PROCESSION AT THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE.

[Illustration: THE FUNERAL PROCESSION AT THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE.]




ESPLANADE OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES.

[Illustration: ESPLANADE OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES.]




THE CATAFALQUE, DÔME DES INVALIDES.

[Illustration: THE CATAFALQUE, DÔME DES INVALIDES.]




THE FUNERAL CAR.

[Illustration: THE FUNERAL CAR.]




OPENING THE CASKET.

[Illustration: OPENING THE CASKET.]




ROYAL COURT OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES.

[Illustration: ROYAL COURT OF THE HOTEL DES INVALIDES.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Napoleon Gallery, by Achille Reveil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NAPOLEON GALLERY ***

***** This file should be named 57483-0.txt or 57483-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/4/8/57483/

Produced by Brian Coe, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
